# Accounting For Uncertainty in Gender Inequality Data in Nepal

Kaitlyn Crowley

11/18/20

Throughout history, women have been placed in a social position considered to be inferior to that of men.  This unequal position inevitability leads to unequal treatment and attention.  In many parts of the world, even today in more advanced countries, some of the most prominent inequalities that women often face include unequal opportunities to access health care, specifically maternal health care, and unequal access to education.  The inability to take advantage of these seemingly basic freedoms results in a woman’s inability to exercise her freedoms in other spheres of society, including the economy, politics, or her community.  Women are instead expected to remain at home and care for the family and, in many countries, girls are forced into an early marriage because it is believed that marriage and caring for a family is her sole purpose.  

Nepal is a country where these unfreedoms are particularly pronounced.  The prevailing patriarchal traditions and high levels of poverty serve to keep women in subordinate roles.  In these roles, women in Nepal experience some of the highest rates of maternal mortality and loss of a child in childbirth, even among other developing south Asian countries.  Girls in Nepal are also seen as a less important investment than boys, so their parents are less likely to spend the money to send them to school, or their schools are inferior.  Interestingly, the inherent complexity of this issue stems from the fact that societal norms perpetuate the denial of these rights to women, yet when women don’t have these rights, they are less able to challenge the patriarchal norms that maintain the social norms.  

It is necessary to collect data on these inequalities and analyze it throughout the country in order to quantify the many disparities that exist between men and women.  Only through the analysis of quantitative data are researchers and aid groups able to address these often qualitative human development problems within the context of gender inequality.  However, current data collection methods such as the Nepal Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS) or censuses quickly become out of date.  Even though the NDHS is conducted more frequently than censuses, there is still room for error since the surveys are only conducted once every five years and the data is only collected in randomized clusters, meaning not every household or area is taken into account.  Due to this level of uncertainty, data science methods such as Bayesian geostatistical models and neural networks can be applied to the data in order to account for the uncertainty and create maps and datasets at a higher resolution than the original data allowed for.  These methods take survey or census data in addition to geospatial covariates as inputs

It is essential to note that these data science methods are only as accurate as the data that is input.  Since census and survey data is so often out of date or incomplete, it becomes necessary to include other measures to improve the accuracy of the measurements of inequality.  The most likely way to achieve this is through improved data collection technology that allows for a frictionless pathway of data collection throughout the country.  Call Detail Records (CDR) are a promising technology to accomplish this collection of data.  However, the data from this method is difficult to disaggregate according to gender and has therefore not been shown to significantly increase the accuracy of the data science methods.  Further research is necessary to see whether or not CDR data is a possible technology to improve the accuracy of data or whether new technologies need to be developed.
