#Anderson and Kitchin Responses: 9/29

In favor of Kitchin
	
Scientific theory is in no way obsolete.  In scientific studies, there is no way that data can ever fully replace theory and completely change the way that we operate.  This is supported by the argument of Kitchin.  This is in contrast to Anderson’s argument that advances in data are making the scientific method obsolete and unnecessary.  
It is essential that we are actually able to see where shifts in data come from, making sure to see the causation, not just correlation in the data collected.  There are also many fallacies in the use of data that make it such that it would be dangerous to rely on it on its own.  Data can often have sampling bias since not every piece of data can always be included.  Data also doesn’t exist alone.  It must be observed within the context of the greater world around it, not just the numbers and statistics collected.  In addition is not free from human bias when the data is being collected since humans must create the methods and so with a particular lens or purpose in mind.  The data only serves as a path to answer what is actually happening in certain trends or situations, but it does not actually answer why those trends occur.  
 Big Data can be incredibly helpful in advancing the realm of scientific studies since it allows for the creation of more holistic models, but the use of the big data should only be a starting point for the creation of new scientific questions.  It is important that researchers and scientists have a question or a hypothesis to guide their research.  A question must still drive the data and it is essential that the methods of collection do not overshadow the information being collected.  It is important to note, and Kitchin acknowledges this, that data-driven-science holds the possibility of still having a method and theory.  In this approach, the data is used to help generate a hypothesis, but this still maintains the importance of theory.
One of the most significant reasons that data will not, and should not, make theory obsolete is that big data is often inaccurate in the studies of the humanities and some other areas since they do not always have statistical data associated with them.  Data does not take things such as culture and artifacts such as literature since there is a distinct level of human interpretation and impact when reading a text of looking at a piece of art.  Data cannot replace this development of theory about people since algorithms are not able to capture the context of the data or underlying meaning.  Some believe that data can increase the objectivity of these interpretations, while others believe that the new methods of big data collection should only serve as a complement to the more traditional methods and should not replace them in the development of new scientific ideas.  In general, it is essential that theory remain a major part of investigations in these areas because it is impossible to fully compile the complexities of these studies into number and data.
It is important to note that there is still an importance of big data in scientific studies, but the unpredictability of human behavior makes it so that theory is still necessary in the creation of these ideas and conclusions.  There are some areas of study where big data could be relied on more, but it is impossible for it to ever kill off theory since so much of scientific discovery is based on information that requires scientists to dig deep into the complexities of issues that take into account language, race, and geography, which data can only touch on at a very surface-level.  In these areas, context is essential and big data does not take this into account, while theory makes sure to take more levels of influence into account when drawing conclusions.





In favor of Anderson

Big Data is now replacing the use of theory and making the scientific theory unnecessary and obsolete.  Models have the ability to explain the world around us in a consistent way that theory has never been able to do.  Although these models might not always be perfect, they are able to create such large sections of data that the imperfections are unimportant.  Companies such as Google are finding that they can process large amounts of data and, through this data, draw conclusions that can stand alone without theory.  There is no need to actually analyze human behavior through studies such as psychology since data can demonstrate conclusions that without having measures of causation.  For example, Google is able to translate languages without actually knowing the language itself, instead just utilizing the large amounts of data it has access to.  
Anderson notes that models are not always reliable and that we have so much access to data that models are not able to explain the trends.  Overall, it is sufficient to recognize that there is correlation between ideas without actually needing to acknowledge the causation, especially since the data surrounding certain issues is changing so fast that models would be out of date by the time they are completed.  It is not necessary to take the time and effort to create models based on theories any more since correlation is enough to know that a trend exists.  
In terms of biology, the models that scientists produced, for example, about Mendelian process, are actually inaccurate and a significant oversimplification of the data that is being gathered.  Taking this example, it is now hard to find a model that can encompass all of the information that we now have about biology.  Also, Anderson includes an example of J. Craig Venter’s process of gene sequencing utilizing data.  He was able to discover a new species just through data analysis.  In this age, it is not necessary to know details about the species since the sequence of data collected can be compared to the vast stores of data that already exist about similar species.  It is necessary to have these rapid ways of collecting data to generation new knowledge.  If Venter had taken the time to create a theory and a model for the discovery of this species, it would have taken significantly longer for him to identify it, or he may not have even identified the species at all.  Even in the study of physics, it is starting to be too expensive and complex to formulate models and it is so difficult to create experiments that actually test new hypotheses.  In this situation, it becomes necessary to just rely on the data since models are so outdated in the face of these new advances.  
Kitchin even acknowledges some of the uses of data.  Companies like Amazon can produce recommendations for shoppers.  These recommendations don’t require theory or knowledge about the shopper and their life.  Instead, only data about their internet habits and shopping history is necessary.  In this case, data can actually lead to the creation of more data, a process that would become too complex to explain through theory.



