# Kaitlyn Crowley's Annotated Bibliography: Analyzing Gender Inequality through the use Data Science Innovation and Insight

Word Count: 3168

Bosco, Claudio, Samantha Watson, Alina Game, Chris Brooks, Daniele de Rigo, Sarchil Qader, Joshua Greenhalgh, Kristine Nilsen, Amy Ninneman, Richard Wood, and Linus Bengtsson. 2019. “Towards High-Resolution Sex-Disaggregated Dynamic Mapping”. FlowMinder.org: FlowMinder. Retrieved from https://web.flowminder.org/publications/towards-high-resolution-sex-dissagregated-dynamic-mapping
This report analyzes the development problem relating to gender inequality within the country of Nepal.  The overall goal of the research was to determine whether new methods of data collection such as Subscriber Identification Module-card (SIM-card) tracking could be utilized to determine where women are living to focus aid to those specific areas and increase equality.  Within Nepal, gender is a significant cause of difference in freedoms for men and women.  Women are subject to disadvantages at a greater rate than men, but to fully understand these disadvantages, aid organizations require that they know where the resources should be directed.  In the study this report covers, data is analyzed within two primary categories.  The first of these includes the development indicators of literacy, agriculture-based-occupations, and births in health facilities.  Data for these areas was collected through national surveys, mobile phone data, and satellite imagery.  The second area of study was of migration patterns and general gender mobility within Nepal.  In order to measure this, mobile phone data was utilized, more specifically a method of tracking SIM-card sharing.  Within each study, Machine Learning techniques and Bayesian Geostatistical models were used to help create maps that could then be analyzed for the data trends.  
However, these issues being analyzed are particularly complex within Nepal.  It is difficult to measure development within the country because so many freedoms are denied to women.  There is a history of severe gender inequality, especially in access to education, the ability to participate in the political system, and unequal access to economic and land resources.  For example, the researchers found that only 57% of women participated in the labor market while 78% of men were active participants.  In addition, only 39% of women in rural areas completed secondary schooling, while 62% of men in rural areas have a secondary education.  In recent years, the country has started to see a shift in these inequalities and unfreedoms though, which gives hope that women will begin to experience greater equality in Nepal in the future.  The report also shares that Nepal is seeing significant numbers of males migrating overseas to find jobs, and while this has challenged some traditional views of the roles of males and females, there are also issues with the fact that female migration is limited.  Gender inequality is also demonstrated by the fact that females are disproportionately represented within the agricultural industry where they do not have opportunity for economic growth and their role in the agricultural community perpetuates a lower level of education for girls.  The reliance throughout the country on agriculture also means that a high percentage of the population is in poverty, with 23% of people in Nepal living in extreme poverty.  The high levels of poverty only serve to aggravate inequalities. 
The report focuses on the methods for collecting this data, primarily through the census data, satellite imagery, Mobile Network Operators, and Call Detail Records within Nepal.  
After the studies were completed though, it was determined that many of the models had poor performance due to the fact that so much of the data was not able to be categorized by gender.  For example, the researchers found that when tracing SIM card data, there was significant error due to the fact that almost 47% of people studied shared SIM cards, even if they had their own SIM identification, especially within families.  While this means that the data can be collected, it proves that changes to the gathering methods must be made so that the specific issues caused by gender inequality can be addressed, not just issues plaguing the general population.  It is important to note that, even with all of the technological advances, there is still inequality and the technology itself does not solve the problems of gender inequality.  This report contributes to my overall goal of determining new geospatial datasets and techniques that can be applied to the complex issue of gender inequality, with a specific focus on Nepal.  The gap in the research also provides an interesting avenue of further investigation.

Brinda, Ethel M., Anto P. Rajkumar, and Ulrika Enemark. 2015. “Association Between Gender Inequality Index and Child Mortality Rates: A Cross-National Study of 138 Countries”. Biomed Central Public Health, 15(1), 97. doi:10.1186/s12889-015-1449-3
Gender inequality can manifest itself in a variety of different ways in society, the majority of those effects bringing harm to women, and the people around them.  This report analyzes these connections, specifically whether or not there is a correlation between gender inequality and child mortality.  Through data collection across 138 countries, the authors of the report found that there is a positive correlation between gender inequality and the child mortality rates of these countries.  With this data, the authors of the report attempt to address the inherent harms of discriminating against women in society and to highlight the fact that this discrimination does not only harm the women, but also their children.  These harms extend from education to health and to poverty, but the main focus of this report is the relationship of health with gender inequality.  All of these effects of gender inequality go against the necessity of freedoms in order continue human development.  The children dying due to gender inequality are being denied the freedom of social opportunities, which then leads further into the complexities of gender inequality as a whole since it denies women and children almost all freedoms in many parts of the world, hindering development as it relates to Amartya Sen’s definition.
Although there was not specific country studied, the general trends uncovered can be applied to almost any country, within certain socioeconomic classifications.  Low and middle income countries were found to be the countries where the infant, neonatal, and child mortality rates were all the highest.  The research also found that it is in low and middle income countries that the Gender Inequality Index measurement is the highest.  However, the manifestation of this inequality that leads to increased mortality can take a wide variety of forms, making the solutions to the issue incredibly complex.  Reasons for increased child mortality range from female infanticide and circumcision, maternal under-nutrition, female exposure to domestic violence, unequal access to education, and a lack of control over the finances of the household.  In some countries, there is even a direct aversion to the birth of daughters and this idea of being undesired carries throughout the woman’s life.
When collecting the data, the researchers utilized immunization records and child mortality rates from the World Health Organization (WHO) Statistical Information System’s global database.  Data from World Bank was utilized for per capita GDP and information from the CIA global database was applied to account for information about the Economic Inequality Index of the countries studied.  Regression models were then calculated with the STATA rregfit command and analyses were completed with STATA 12.1.  Although these methods in themselves are advanced, they are only as advanced as the data that is being processed.  The authors of the report acknowledge that, at the time of the study, the Gender Inequality Index was a relatively new model and no other geospatial data science methods were utilized.  The issues of gender inequality are so multi-faceted that there are limitations in what the current technology available to researchers can actually analyze. For example, barriers to gender equality range from cultural stereotypes, to the tradition of dowries, to inheritance rights, and to increasing health care costs.  The researchers recognize that the data provided by many of the low income countries studied was likely not updated or was underreported.  At the time of the investigation though, the datasets and methods for analysis used were relatively novel and could not take all of these factors into account.  The complex nature of the issue warrants further research and technological advancements in order gather complete data.  Knowing this, the information in this article leads to an acknowledgement of a gap in the research that I could pursue further in my personal research and apply to the country I decide to focus on.

Garcia, David, Yonas Mitike Kassa, Angel Cuevas, Manuel Cebrian, Esteban Moro, Iyad Rahwan, and Ruben Cuevas . 2018. “Analyzing Gender Inequality Through Large-Scale Facebook Advertising Data”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - PNAS, 115(27), 6958-6963. doi:10.1073/pnas.1717781115
This report analyzes the use of Facebook advertising data to measure gender inequality in 217 countries around the world, encompassing around 1.4 billion people.  The overall goal of the research was to determine how access to technologies such as social media ends up impacting factors of gender inequality and whether or not Facebook user data could provide a means of measuring a correlation.  The Facebook Gender Divide (FDG), which is a measure of the ratio of male and female Facebook users, was used as a general explanation of three different types of gender inequality measurements: education, economic opportunity, and health.  These inequalities are accompanied by significant harms to woman and her children, including a lack of resources and a lack of access to health care.  Within the study, it was found that when countries had a higher FDG, there was also greater gender inequality within the country.  Regions of the world that demonstrated this divide in particular were Africa and Southwest Asia.  From these findings, the researchers concluded that when women have a greater access to social media such as Facebook there is a correlation and a causation in the relationship to gender equality.  Access to Facebook is an indicator that women are in a place of greater equality in a society, but access to information and various opportunities or resources also aids women in gaining gender equality by showing where they can get jobs or by connecting them with one another as a form of community and empowerment.
In seeking to address this human development problem of gender inequality, the study implemented Facebook’s marketing Application Programming Interface (API).  API is typically encoded with the age and gender of the users of Facebook to produce and show targeted advertising to users.  Within this study, the data of the age and gender of users was collected and compared with the Daily Active Users of Facebook in order to see the general trends of Facebook use.  Combining all of this information, FGD could be calculated using the logarithm of the ratio of male and female activity on the site.  Regression models were then applied to find the trends in the data.  These trends were compared to data from studies from the Global and Internet & Tech Surveys of Pew Research Center, which use more traditional methods of gathering data, in order to make sure that the measurements were valid.
It is important to note that, although this is a relatively new data science method, it is also limited by ethical issues, so smaller, more specific groups within countries cannot be identified.  The issue of gender inequality is incredibly complex, so it is not always useful to collect data in such generalized manners.  When individual populations are not identified, issues of gender inequality cannot actually be solved, they are just made known to the public.  Rather than acting as a solution to the problem of gender inequality, the measurement of the FGD is a method of recognizing where there is a divide in the first place.  The authors of this report recognize that their investigations are solely a starting point for research on how access to social media like Facebook relates to gender inequality in areas such as health, economic opportunity, education, and political participation.  Further investigation would need to be completed in order to implement this technology to address the problems.
When applying this study to the idea of human development, the freedom to access opportunities and information through social media is what leads to freedom for increased social opportunities, such as education through these freedoms, women are more likely to gain political and economic freedoms.  This is shown by the correlation between the FGD and these inequalities indices.  Studying the increasing use of technology, specifically social media use, is a method of applying an ever evolving technology to a human development problem of the “unfreedoms” that many women still face around the world and I will likely be able to apply it to my specific country of focus.

Neal, Sarah, Corrine W. Ruktanonchai, Venkatraman Chandra-Mouli, Chloe Harvey, Zoe Matthews, Neena Raina, and Andrew Tatem. 2019. “Using Geospatial Modelling to Estimate the Prevalence of Adolescent First Births in Nepal.” BMJ Global Health doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2018-000763
The rates of adolescent first births are strongly correlated with inequalities in wealth, geographic region of a country, education level, and even whether a girl lives in an urban or rural area.  This report analyzes the relationship between these factors and attempts to apply data science techniques to be able to analyze the data at a more targeted district level.  Within Nepal, gender inequality continues to be a significant development issue and adolescent births are a primary cause of the continuous cycle of poverty that many women within the country experience.  In fact, adolescent fertility falls under the sustainable development goal of “Good Health and Wellbeing.”  When a female has a child at an age younger than 20, not only does this threaten her physical health, but educational and financial opportunities are often lost for both her and for her child.  In Nepal, the rate of adolescent pregnancies and births is especially high due to low female social status, a high rate of early marriage, and a lack of education about reproductive health.  The studies found that 40% of women in Nepal had their first child before the age of 20 and 5% of women had their first child before they were 16. 
The research presented in this article analyzes how the Bayesian geospatial logistic regression model can be applied to Nepal Demographic and Health Survey data in order to create mappings based on a district level of data, rather than the typical regional measurements. Global Positioning Systems Coordinates and ArcGIS software were used to map the survey data originally, the data being divided into the categories of wealth quintile, urban/rural residence, education level, marital status, and geographic region.  Then, applying he Bayesian model, these statistics were mapped at the district level. It is important to note that, in the collection of the data for this study, the census data was from 2011, while the report was published in 2019.  The lack of new census data is a significant limitation to the accuracy of the findings and adds to the complexity of the issue since it is so difficult to reach these women to collect new data.
The issue of adolescent fertility and its measurement is especially complex due to the fact that, within a single region of Nepal country, there can be many different factors causing significant variations in the level of adolescent fertility.  Between districts, the rate of adolescent fertility ranged from 26% to 67%, implying that these same disparities can exist at a local level.  A single village that does not have access to a school would likely have a much higher rate of adolescent fertility, but this would not be shown in the regional data.  The article acknowledges that, in order to target the female populations who are in need of particular resources due to adolescent fertility, the scales of analysis must be shifted.  Having access to high-resolution mapping from the Bayesian models allows the resources given to these women to be more focused and therefore used more effectively.  
According to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development, development stems from access to freedoms.  Adolescent fertility leads to a significant denial of many social and economic freedoms.  Even more so, it is the denial of these freedoms in the first place that leads to adolescent fertility, since the data in this report found that girls with lower education, less wealth, and a rural residence were much more likely to have children when they are younger.  The information from this report will aid my research due to its specific focus on the country of Nepal and the information that it provides, not only on new data science methods, but on the specific issue of adolescent fertility, which is a cause of and caused by gender inequality.

Vaitla, Bapu, Claudio Bosco, Victor Alegana, Tom Bird, Carla Pezzulo, Graeme Hornby, Alessandro Sorichetta, Jessica Steele, Cori Ruktanonchai, Nick Ruktanonchai, Erik Wetter, Linus Bengtsson, and Andrew J Tatem, Riccardo Di Clemente, Miguel Luengo-Oroz, Marta C. González, René Nielsen, omas Baar, Felicia Vacarelu, Munmun de Choudhury, Sanket Sharma, Tomaz Logar, Wouter Eekhout, and René Nielsen. 2017. “Big Data and the Well-Being of Women and Girls.” Data2X. Retrieved from https://www.openaire.eu/search/publication?articleId=od__348::84be43eb9164d5fbf098d9504feeb57d
The technology for analyzing and collecting data is developing at an incredibly rapid rate, allowing for large data sets to be broken down into even more specific classifications.  This report studies three different ways that improving methods of data collection can be applied to issues of gender inequality and addresses the question of how accurate these methods actually are.  Some of the specific inequalities that the studies measured included literacy, stunting, and mobility.  Rather than focus the report on the actual inequalities that exist, the main focus of this report is the methods with which to measure the inequalities so that policy can be implemented in more specific areas of countries.  Three main methods of measuring gender inequalities around the world are proposed, including mapping geospatial data using satellite imagery, collecting trends in economic activity through the use of Credit Card Records (CCRs) and Call Detail Records (CDRs), and collecting internet activity data.  By combining these new methods of data collection and analysis with conventional Demographic Household Surveys, a more representative image of the data could be created.
All three of these methods have the end goal of helping to close the gender gap between men and women.  The article emphasizes the fact that, due to the complexity of the issue of gender inequality in all of the regions of study, traditional methods of data collection and analysis cannot find extensive trends or allow for a view of sub regions of a country.  However, it is only through analysis of these sub regions that aid can be effectively distributed to decrease the gap.  In addition, even though the new models of collection provide an increased amount of data, they are not without limitations themselves.  For example, when analyzing the geospatial imagery, it provided accurate models when measuring literacy, but other variables were much more dependent on the cultural and societal context.  When analyzing the CCRs and CDRs, the data tended to be biased towards groups of people who were slightly more affluent since they have greater access to these technologies.  There is still a significant population, especially of women, who do not even have credit cards of cell phones.  Finally, the social media data is especially difficult to disaggregate based on sex, even with new algorithms for classifying gender by the name and profile picture of the account.
Each model focuses the development problem of inequality in access to economic freedoms and social freedoms, including health care and education.  This relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development because, without everyone having access to these freedoms, there is an inherent level of unfreedom within the society that prevents complete development.  In addition, the report emphasizes the fact that technological advances in the collection of data will not solve the problem of inequality by themselves.  Political leaders are required to step up and implement policy change, which is another example of how developmental freedoms and the protection of those freedoms are interconnected.  Advancing the technology of data collection will not suddenly make the inequalities faced by women visible to everyone.  Instead, it requires a combination of technology and policy to make this happen.
While this report does not focus on a single country, it is still beneficial to my overall research because it provides extensive information on three new data collection methods.  While continuing my research, I can begin to apply the ideas proposed by these methods to a specific country.
