# Annotated Bibliography Rough Draft 1st Source

Towards High-Resolution Sex-Disaggregated Dynamic Mapping
	
This report analyzes the development problem of gender inequality within the country of Nepal.  Within Nepal, gender is a significant cause of difference in freedoms for people.  Women are subject to disadvantages at a greater rate than men, but to fully understand these disadvantages, aid organizations require that they know where the resources should be directed.  In the study this report covers, data is analyzed within two primary categories.  The first of these includes the development indicators of literacy, agriculture-based-occupations, and births in health facilities.  Data for these areas was collected through national surveys, mobile phone data, and satellite imagery.  The second area of study was of migration patterns and general gender mobility within Nepal.  In order to measure this, mobile phone data was utilized, more specifically a method of tracking Subscriber Identification Module-card (SIM) sharing.  Within each study, Machine Learning techniques and Bayesian Geostatistical models were used to help create maps that could then be analyzed for the data.  
However, these issues being analyzed are particularly complex within Nepal.  There is a history of severe gender inequality, especially in access to education, ability to participate in the political system, and unequal access to economic and land resources.  Over the recent years, the country has started to see a shift in these inequalities and unfreedoms though, which gives hope that women will begin to experience greater equality in Nepal in the future.  Nepal is also seeing significant numbers of males migrating overseas to find jobs, and while this has challenged some traditional views of the roles of males and females, there are also issues with the act that female migration is limited.  In addition, females are disproportionately represented within the agricultural industry, so this perpetuates a lower level of education for girls.  The reliance throughout the country on agriculture also means that a high percentage of the population is in poverty, aggravating inequalities. 
The article focuses on the methods for collecting this data, primarily through the census data, satellite imagery, Mobile Network Operators, and Call Detail Records within Nepal.  After the studies were completed though, it was determined that many of the models had poor performance due to the fact that so much of the data was not able to be categorized by gender.  While this means that the data could be collected, it proves that changes to the methods must be made so that the specific issues caused by gender inequality can be addressed, not just issues plaguing the general population.
This article relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development because it discusses the ways that unfreedoms in the areas of the economy, healthcare, and education have caused women in Nepal to be placed in a lower social standing than the men in the society.  This differentiation between genders leads to overall increased poverty due to the fact that not all of the workforce is being properly recognized.  The research done by the authors of this article addresses the human development dimensions of standard of living as well as education and health.  This article relates to the sustainable development goal of gender equality.  The authors of this article utilize GIS data to analyze physical social, and built environmental elements.  This is analyzed using data including Artificial Neural Networks, Bayesian Geostatistical Models, and remote sensing data (including NDVI and EVI).  Human development patterns associated with a slow increase in the equality of women within the country of Nepal are being explored within the article.  Within Nepal, shifts are beginning to occur where women are gaining more equality, but the purpose of this investigation was to see whether there are methods and area in which aid can be concentrated to accelerate the increase in equality.  The question the authors are seeking to answer is:  How can the data collected from the use of mobile phones and mapping methods such as GIS can be used to increase equality within the society of Nepal?
