#Annotated Bibliography: Gender Inequality and Data Science

Bosco, Claudio, Samantha Watson, Alina Game, Chris Brooks, Daniele de Rigo, Sarchil Qader, Joshua Greenhalgh, Kristine Nilsen, Amy Ninneman, Richard Wood, and Linus Bengtsson. 2019. “Towards High-Resolution Sex-Disaggregated Dynamic Mapping”. FlowMinder.org: FlowMinder. Retrieved from https://web.flowminder.org/publications/towards-high-resolution-sex-dissagregated-dynamic-mapping

  This report analyzes the development problem relating to gender inequality within the country of Nepal.  The overall goal of the research was to determine whether   new methods of data collection such as Subscriber Identification Module-card (SIM-card) tracking could be utilized to determine where women are living to focus     aid to those specific areas and increase equality.  Within Nepal, gender is a significant cause of difference in freedoms for men and women.  Women are subject to   disadvantages at a greater rate than men, but to fully understand these disadvantages, aid organizations require that they know where the resources should be       directed.  In the study this report covers, data is analyzed within two primary categories.  The first of these includes the development indicators of literacy,     agriculture-based-occupations, and births in health facilities.  Data for these areas was collected through national surveys, mobile phone data, and satellite       imagery.  The second area of study was of migration patterns and general gender mobility within Nepal.  In order to measure this, mobile phone data was utilized,   more specifically a method of tracking SIM-card sharing.  Within each study, Machine Learning techniques and Bayesian Geostatistical models were used to help       create maps that could then be analyzed for the data.  
  However, these issues being analyzed are particularly complex within Nepal.  There is a history of severe gender inequality, especially in access to education,     ability to participate in the political system, and unequal access to economic and land resources.  In recent years, the country has started to see a shift in       these inequalities and unfreedoms though, which gives hope that women will begin to experience greater equality in Nepal in the future.  Nepal is also seeing       significant numbers of males migrating overseas to find jobs, and while this has challenged some traditional views of the roles of males and females, there are    also issues with the act that female migration is limited.  In addition, females are disproportionately represented within the agricultural industry, so this perpetuates   a lower level of education for girls.  The reliance throughout the country on agriculture also means that a high percentage of the population is in   poverty,  aggravating inequalities. 
  The article focuses on the methods for collecting this data, primarily through the census data, satellite imagery, Mobile Network Operators, and Call Detail Records within Nepal.  
  After the studies were completed though, it was determined that many of the models had poor performance due to the fact that so much of the data was not able to be categorized by gender.  For example, the researchers found that when tracing SIM card data, there was significant error due to the fact that many people, even if they have their own SIM identification, share SIM cards, especially within families.  This led to the inability to differentiate between genders when collecting the data.  While this means that the data could be collected, it proves that changes to the gathering methods must be made so that the specific issues caused by gender inequality can be addressed, not just issues plaguing the general population.  It is important to note that, even with all of the technological advances, there is still inequality and the technology itself does not solve the problems of gender inequality.

Brinda Ethel M., Anto P. Rajkumar, and Ulrika Enemark. 2015. “Association Between Gender Inequality Index and Child Mortality Rates: A Cross-National Study of 138 Countries”. Biomed Central Public Health, 15(1), 97. doi:10.1186/s12889-015-1449-3

Gender inequality can manifest itself in a variety of different ways in society, the majority of those effects being harmful to the women affected, and the people around them.  This report analyzes whether there are connections between gender inequality in the 138 countries studied and the child mortality rates in those countries.  Through data collection across multiple areas, the authors of the report found that there is a positive correlation between gender inequality and the child mortality rates of these countries.  With this data, the authors of the report are attempting to address the inherent harms of discriminating against women in society and highlight the fact that this discrimination does not only harm the women, but also their children.  These harms extend from education to health and to poverty, but the main focus of this report is the relationship of health with gender inequality.  All of these effects of gender inequality go against the need of freedoms in order continue human development.  The children dying due to gender inequality are being denied the freedom of social opportunities, which then leads further into the complexities of gender inequality as a whole since it denies women and children almost all freedoms in many parts of the world.  Gender inequality limits real freedoms instead of expanding them as Amartya Sen’s definition of human development suggests.
Although there was not specific country studied, the general trends uncovered can be applied to almost any country.  Low and middle income countries were found to be the countries where the infant, neonatal, and child mortality rates were all the highest.  The research also found that it is in low and middle income countries that the Gender Inequality Index measurement is the highest.  However, the manifestation of this inequality leads to increased mortality can take a wide variety of forms, making the solutions to the issue incredibly complex.  In addition to that, these different pathways to child mortality make it extremely difficult to collect accurate data on the issue.  Some of the reasons for increased child mortality include female infanticide and circumcision, maternal under-nutrition, female exposure to domestic violence, unequal access to education, and a lack of control over the finances of the household.  
When collecting the data, the researchers utilized immunization records and child mortality rates from the World Health Organization (WHO) Statistical Information System’s global database.  Data from World Bank was utilized for per capita GDP and information from the CIA global database was applied to account for information about the Economic Inequality Index of the countries studied.  Regression models were then calculated with the STATA rregfit command and analyses were completed with STATA 12.1.  Although these methods in themselves are advanced, they are only as advanced as the data that is being processed.  The authors of the report acknowledge that, at the time of the study, the Gender Inequality Index was a relatively new model and no other geospatial data science methods were utilized.  The issues of gender inequality are so multi-faceted that there are limitations in what the current technology available to researchers can actually analyze. For example, barriers to gender equality range from cultural stereotypes, to the tradition of dowries, to inheritance rights, and to increasing health care costs.  The researchers recognize that the data provided by many of the low income countries studied was likely not updated or was underreported.  At the time of the investigation though, the datasets and methods for analysis used were relatively novel and could not take all of these factors into account.  The complex nature of the issue warrants further research and technological advancements in order gather complete data. 

Garcia, David, Yonas Mitike Kassa, Angel Cuevas, Manuel Cebrian, Esteban Moro, Iyad Rahwan, and Ruben Cuevas . 2018. “Analyzing Gender Inequality Through Large-Scale Facebook Advertising Data”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - PNAS, 115(27), 6958-6963. doi:10.1073/pnas.1717781115

Address that there is a correlation AND causation
This report analyzes the use of Facebook advertising data to measure gender inequality in 217 countries around the world, encompassing around 1.4 billion people.  The overall goal of the research was to determine how access to technologies such as social media ends up impacting factors of gender inequality and whether or not Facebook user data could provide a means of measuring a correlation.  The Facebook Gender Divide (FDG), which is the ratio of male and female Facebook users, was used as a general explanation of three different types of gender inequality measurements: education, economic opportunity, and health.  These inequalities are accompanied by significant harms to the woman and her children.  Within the study, it was found that when countries had a higher FDG, there was also greater gender inequality within the country.  Regions of the world that demonstrated this divide in particular were Africa and Southwest Asia.  From these findings, the researchers concluded that when women have a greater access to social media such as Facebook, that access to information and various opportunities or resources aids them in gaining gender equality in multiple aspects of their lives.
In seeking to address this human development problem of gender inequality, the study implemented Facebook’s marketing Application Programming Interface (API).  API is typically encoded with the age and gender of the users of Facebook to produce and show targeted advertising to users.  Within this study, the data of the age and gender of users was collected and compared with the Daily Active Users of Facebook in order to see the general trends of Facebook use.  Combining all of this information, FGD could be calculated using the logarithm of the ratio of male and female activity on the site.  Regression models were then applied to find the trends in the data.  These trends were compared to data from studies from the Global and Internet & Tech Surveys of Pew Research Center in order to make sure that the measurements were valid on a smaller scale when utilizing a relatively broad and novel data collection method.
It is important to note that, although this is a relatively new data science method, it is also limited by ethical issues, so smaller, more specific groups within countries cannot be identified.  The issue of gender inequality is incredibly complex, so it is not always useful to collect data in such generalized manners.  When individual populations are not identified, issues of gender inequality cannot actually be solved, they are just made known to the public.  Rather than acting as a solution to  the problem of gender inequality, the measurement of the FGD is a method of recognizing where there is a divide in the first place.  The authors of this report recognize that their investigations are solely a starting point for investigations on how access to social media like Facebook correlates to gender inequality in areas such as health, economic opportunity, education, and political participation.  Further investigation would need to be completed in order to implement this technology to address the problems.
When applying this study to the idea of human development, the freedom to access opportunities and information through social media is what leads to freedom for increased social opportunities, such as education and even political and economic freedoms.  This is shown by the correlation between the FGD and these inequalities indices.  Studying the increasing use of technology, specifically social media use, is a method of applying an ever evolving technology to a human development problem of the “unfreedoms” that many women still face around the world.

Neal, Sarah, Corrine W. Ruktanonchai, Venkatraman Chandra-Mouli, Chloe Harvey, Zoe Matthews, Neena Raina, and Andrew Tatem. 2019. “Using Geospatial Modelling to Estimate the Prevalence of Adolescent First Births in Nepal.” BMJ Global Health doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2018-000763

The rates of adolescent first births are strongly correlated with inequalities in wealth, geographic region of a country, education level, or even whether a girl lives in an urban or rural area.  This report analyzes the relationship between these factors and attempts to apply data science techniques to be able to analyze the data at a more targeted district level.  Within Nepal, gender equality continues to be a significant development issue and adolescent births are a primary cause of the continuous cycle of poverty that many women within the country experience.  In fact, adolescent fertility falls under the sustainable development goal of “Good Health and Wellbeing.”  When a female has a child at an age younger than 20, not only does this threaten her physical health, but educational and financial opportunities are also put at a significant risk for both her and for her child.  In Nepal, the rate of adolescent pregnancies and births is especially high due to low female social status, a high rate of early marriage, and a lack of education about reproductive health.  
The research presented in this article analyzes how the Bayesian geospatial logistic regression model can be applied to Nepal Demographic and Health Survey data in order to create mappings based on a district level of data, rather than the typical regional measurements. Global Positioning Systems Coordinates and ArcGIS software were used to map the survey data originally, divided into the categories of wealth quintile, urban/rural residence, education level, marital status, and geographic region.  Then, applying he Bayesian model, these statistics were mapped at the regional level. It is important to note that, in the collection of the data for this study, the census data was from 2011, while the report was published in 2019.  The lack of new census data is a significant limitation to the accuracy of the findings and adds to the complexity of the issue since it is so difficult to reach these women to collect new data.
The issue of adolescent fertility and its measurement is especially complex due to the fact that, within a single region of a country, there could be many different factors causing significant variations in the level of adolescent fertility even within the one region.  A single village that does not have access to a school would likely have a much higher rate of adolescent fertility, but this would not be shown in the regional data.  The article acknowledges that, in order to target the female populations who are in need of particular resources due to adolescent fertility, the scales of analysis must be shifted.  Having access to high-resolution mapping from the Bayesian models allows the resources given to these women to be more focused and therefore used more effectively.  
According to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development, development stems from access to freedoms.  Adolescent fertility leads to a significant denial of many social and economic freedoms.  Even more so, it is the denial of these freedoms in the first place that leads to adolescent fertility, since the data in this report found that girls with lower education, less wealth, and a rural residence were much more likely to have children when they are younger. 

Vaitla, Bapu, Claudio Bosco, Victor Alegana, Tom Bird, Carla Pezzulo, Graeme Hornby, Alessandro Sorichetta, Jessica Steele, Cori Ruktanonchai, Nick Ruktanonchai, Erik Wetter, Linus Bengtsson, and Andrew J Tatem, Riccardo Di Clemente, Miguel Luengo-Oroz, Marta C. González, René Nielsen, omas Baar, Felicia Vacarelu, Munmun de Choudhury, Sanket Sharma, Tomaz Logar, Wouter Eekhout, and René Nielsen. 2017. “Big Data and the Well-Being of Women and Girls.” Data2X. Retrieved from https://www.openaire.eu/search/publication?articleId=od_348::84be43eb9164d5fbf098d9504feeb57d

The technology for analyzing and collecting data is developing at an incredibly rapid rate, allowing for large data sets to be broken down into even more specific classifications.  This report studies three different ways that improving methods of data collection can be applied to issues of gender inequality.  Some of the specific inequalities that the studies measured included literacy, stunting, and mobility.  Rather than focus the study on the actual inequalities that exist, the main focus of this report is the methods with which to measure the inequalities so that policy can be implemented in more specific areas of countries.  Three main methods of measuring gender inequalities around the world are proposed, including mapping geospatial data using satellite imagery, collecting trends in economic activity through the use of Credit Card Records (CCRs) and Call Detail Records (CDRs), and collecting internet activity data.  By combining these new methods of data collection and analysis with conventional Demographic Household Surveys, a more representative image of the data could be created.
All three of these methods have the end goal of helping to close the gender gap between men and women.  The article emphasizes the fact that, due to the complexity of the issue of gender inequality, traditional methods of data collection and analysis cannot find extensive trends or allow for a view of sub regions of a country.  However, it is only through analysis of these sub regions that aid can be effectively distributed to decrease the gap.  In addition, even though the new models of collection provide an increased amount of data, they are not without limitations themselves.  For example, the geospatial imagery, while it provided accurate models when measuring literacy, other variables were much more dependent on the cultural and societal context.  When analyzing the CCRs and CDRs, the data tends to be biased towards groups of people who are slightly more affluent since they have access to these technologies.  There is still a significant population, especially of women, who do not even have credit cards of cell phones.  Finally, the social media data is especially difficult to disaggregate based on sex, even with new algorithms for classifying gender by the name and profile picture of the account.
Each model focuses the development problem of inequality in access to economic freedoms and social freedoms, including health care and education.  This relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development because, without everyone having access to these freedoms, there is an inherent level of unfreedom within the society that prevents complete development.  In addition, the report emphasizes the fact that technological advances in the collection of data will not solve the problem of inequality by themselves.  Political leaders are required to step up and implement policy change, which is another example of how freedoms and the protection of those freedoms are interconnected.  Advancing the technology will not suddenly make the inequalities faced by women visible to everyone.  Instead, it requires a combination of technology and policy to make this happen.




