# Further Research and Investigation
After completing this initial round of research, I have determined that I will be focusing on the development issue of gender inequality.  Through the process of creating these annotations, I found that this issue is especially significant in Nepal.  At this point, I think that this will be an interesting country for further investigation.  I could extend the scope of research to South Asia in general if I find that there are interesting studies being completed in other countries in the region as well.  Many of my sources were much more broad in their studies, investigating many countries at one time, but Nepal was consistently a country that was studied. 
Within Nepal, the issue of gender inequality is especially prevalent and complex due to the cultural limitations that are still placed on women.  The low economic status of the country also contributes to women being subjected to traditional roles where they are unable to rise to positions of equal power with men.  As mentioned in my annotations, the limitations in access to education, health care, and even reproductive education are key barriers to equality that women in Nepal face.  
However, the number of investigations being done on the inequalities in Nepal give hope that there are solutions to this problem of gender inequality within the country, even if there are significant gaps in the research.  It is these gaps and the inherent complexity of the issue that also makes it an interesting area of investigation.
