# 8/27 Assignment 2: Hans Rosling: The Best Stats You've Ever Seen

I found this video to be fascinating!  In the past year, I have taken a particular interest in analyzing data, especially in animated forms, so it was especially interesting to see the parts of the video where Hans Rosling was presenting different animated graphs.  I had never thought about the fact that there are many databases that exist in the realm of data science for information including health and wealth, but many of these databases are not easily accessible to the general population.  The analogy that Rosling used with the sun and the databases being below the ground really helped me to visualize how important systems like Gapminder, which he helped to develop, can be to the general population analyzing data.  It makes me wonder how many sources of data I are not yet accessible to me.

Another point that Rosling’s presentation brought up was the fact that we, as humans, often have preconceived ideas about the world and place countries in a “we” “them” type of categorization.  These categories are actually not always accurate.  I am guilty of this along with much of the general population.  One of the main ideas I took from Rosling’s talk was the fact that we cannot just use averages of data, especially at a regional level.  So many people place “Africa” into one general category of being in the developing or third world, but the fact is that countries within Africa vary greatly in the health and wealth of their populations, but these numbers even tend to have a wide range within countries.  When looking at data, I am realizing that it must be broken down into very specific regions or sub-categories in order to lead to effective and accurate conclusions.  When this data is “contextualized” as Rosling states, then the aid or resources given to these areas is much more effective.  Having effective use of resources is essential.  If regions are getting resources that they do not actually need, then it is inevitable that other regions and communities are continuing to suffer.  The idea that there has been significant improvement in Asia is also often underestimated according to Rosling and I think this is due to the fact that people do not have easy access to all of the data.

In terms of development indicators, health is often a precursor to wealth.  Within the TedTalk, Rosling states that “health cannot be bought at a supermarket," so money does not always determine if a nation is healthy.  In general, healthy countries tend to increase their health at a faster rate if the people in that population are healthy first.  When taking time to think about this relationship, it makes sense that a healthy population would be stronger, and more fit to enter into business, trade, or other economic ventures where they will begin to make more money.  For example, China was shown on a graph and it clearly gained health in 1960-1980, but then the wealth of the country began to increase at a relatively rapid rate as well beginning around 1980.  In addition, if a country is healthy, more resources and money can be allocated to things such as investments or building businesses instead of having to funnel it towards basic necessities such as food or basic health care, which can become extremely costly. 

One more key point of information that I found particularly significant in this TedTalk was the fact that, within the OECD, the United States has the lowest child survival rate.  In a way, the idea of generalizations about regions or countries can be applied to the US as well.  I have found that people in the United States tend to boast the idea that the US is an example to the rest of the world in almost all areas.  In school, the US is presented as a world powerhouse.  While I agree with this concept in some ways, there are still many areas in which the United States could improve.  Health care is one of them.  It is dangerous for people in the US to think that everything about the system is functioning well or that we are the most advanced.  Although the video did not highlight this, I would be interested to see animated data about the health and wealth of regions of the US over time.  I think I would even be surprised by how much of the country is in a much different health and financial situation than I have ever been in.  
