# Theoretical Framework Response

Throughout my research, each of my sources contributed to a deeper understanding of the different definitions and concepts surrounding the issue of gender inequality and the related difficulties in measuring these inequalities.  One of the main concepts throughout the literature is the pervasive nature of gender inequality.  In almost every society and country, there is some level of gender inequality that persists.  Definitions of gender inequality vary, but overall it is treatment of women in a way that puts them in a position that is inferior to that of men.  The concepts of female education and health care are two of the most prominent studies and focuses of the literature in the area of gender inequality and serve to emphasize the importance of addressing the issue that is so prominent throughout the world.  Patriarchy is another concept that exists throughout the literature on this topic.  There are various theories about the impacts that patriarchy has on a woman’s position in society and the way she can react to different pressures and expectations within that societal framework.  The importance of measuring gender inequalities was another important concept within the literature reviewed.  Different data collection methods were proposed by researchers such as Bosco et al. (2019), and Vaitla et al. (2017) such as Demographic Health Surveys, Call Data Records, and SIM-Card tracking.  Gething et al. (2015) also proposed the concept of survey methods to collect data on women, especially in developing countries.  All of these literature sources emphasized throughout the reports the importance of having these measurement methods to be able to accurately depict gender inequalities and increase the level of understanding that countries have about these inequalities.  Ultimately, Bosco et al. (2019) proposed theories such as the Bayesian model and Artificial Neural Networks which help to explain the need to infer conclusions based on more limited data on many gender inequalities.

According to Bosco et al. (2019), development of countries and global development is not possible when “significant life opportunities are denied to women and girls.”  This gets to the heart of the theories related to investigating gender inequalities.  Not only is it difficult to address the issue due to the many facets of the problem, but the implications of the inequalities do not just impact women and girls.  Overall global development is hindered when women’s development is hindered.  Through this, a clear reasoning and basis emerges for investigating the issue of gender inequality.  The identification of this theory leads to Bosco et al. (2019) also proposing the theory of Bayesian Geostatistical models to be able to estimate inequalities.  The challenges of this phenomena are especially significant since inequalities are so difficult to measure and are so widespread.

The theory that gender inequality ultimately serves to hinder sustainable development not only provides the basis for investigating gender inequalities, but also lays out clear purpose for developing the theory.  Using the knowledge that inequalities prevent development, it becomes easier to understand the necessity for measuring these inequalities.  If half of the world’s population is being held back through unequal treatment and access to rights or resources, it is inevitable that complete development will never be achieved.  Through this theory, I am able to guide my research in the direction of development, knowing that there is a theoretical relationship between gender inequalities and this progress.  This ideal understanding of the importance of actually investigating the gender inequalities leads my research in the direction of solving a deep, systemic problem that affects the entire global population.  Although my research may be located in a specific country, if the findings of measuring gender inequality can be applied in other locations, then the research can have an even more universal impact.  Keeping this universal, theoretical mindset allows me to formulate my research in such a way that it is not too specific to the country or area of interest, but rather that it has the larger goal of addressing the relationship between gender inequalities and sustainable development.
